James Jouce
the houses had grown sombre. The space of Sky above
us was the colour of ever-changing violet and towards it
the lamps of the street lifted their feeble lanterns. The
cold air stung us and we played till our bodies glowed.
Our shouts echoed in the silent street. The career of our
play brought us through the dark muddy Ianes behind
the houses where we ran the gauntlet of the rough tribes
from the cottages, to the back doors of the dark dripping
gardens where odours arose fram the ashpits, to the dark
odorous stables where a coachman smoothed and combed
the horse or shook music from the buckled harness. When
we returned to the street light from the kitchen windows
filled the areas. If my uncle was seen turning the cor-
ner we hid in the shadow until we had seen him safely
housed. Or if Mangan's sister came out on the doorstep
to call her brother in to his tea we watched her from our
shadow peer up and down the street. We waited to see
whether she would remain or go in and, if she remained,
we left our shadow and walked up to Mangan's steps
resignedly. She was waiting for us, her figure defined by
the light from the half-opened door. Her brother always
teased her before he obeyed and I stood by the railings
looking at her. Her dress swung as she moved her body
and the soft rope of her hair tossed from side to Side.
Every morning I lay on the floor in the front parlour
watching her doar. The blind was pulled down to within
an inch of the sash so that could not be seen. When she
came out on the doorstep my heart leaped. I ran to the halls
seized my Books ara followed her. I kept her brown fig-
ure always in my eye and, when we came near the point at
which our ways diverged, I quickened my pace and passed
her. This happened moming after morning. had never
spoken to her, except for a few casual words, and yet her
name was like a summons to all my foolish blood.
Her image accompanied me even in places the most
hostile to romance. On Saturday evenings when my aunt
went marketing had to go to carry some of the parcels.
We walked through the flaring streets, jostled by drunken
men ara bargaining wornen, amid the curses of labourers,
the shrill litanies of shop-boys who stood on guard by the
barrels of pigs' cheeks, the nasal chanting of street-singers,
who sang a come-all-you about O'Donovan Rossa, or a
ballad about the troubles in our native landa These noises
converged in a single sensation of life for me: I imagined
that I bore my chalice safely through a throng of foes. Her
name sprang to my lips at moments in strange prayers and
praises which I myself did not urderstand. My eyes were
often full of tears (l could not tell why) and at times a flood
from my heart seemed to pour itself out into my bosom.
thought little of the future. did not know whether I
'.vould ever speak to her or not or, if spoke to her, hou' I
could tell her of my confused adoration. But my body was
like a harp and her words and gestures were like fingers
running upon the wires.
One evening I went into the back drawing-room in
which the priest died It was a dark rainy evening and
there was no sound in the house. Through one of the 6rcF
ken panes I heard the rain impinge upou the earth, the
fine incessant needles of water playing in the scdden beds.
Some distant lamp or lighted window gleamed below me.
was thankful that I could see so little. All my senses
seemed to desire to veil themselves and, feeling that was
about to slip from them, I pressed the palms of rny hands
together until they trembled, murmuring•. "O lave! O
love!" many times,
