James auuce
the houses had grown sombre. The Space of Sky above
us was the colour of ever-changing violet and towards it
the lamps of the street lifted their feeble lanterns. The
cold air stung us and we played till our bodies glowed.
Our shouts echoed in the silent street. The career of our
play brought us through the dark muddy Ianes behind
the houses where we ran the gauntlet of the rough tribes
from the cottages, to the back doors of the dark dripping
gardens where odours arose from the ashpits, to the dark
odorous stables where a coachman smoothed and combed
the horse or shook music from the buckled harness. When
we returned to the street light fram the kitchen Windows
had filled the areas. If my uncle was seen turning the cor-
ner we hid in the shadow until "'e had seen him safely
housed. Or if Mangan's sister came out on the doorstep
to call her brother in to his tea we watched her from our
shadow peer up ara down the street, We waited to see
whether she would remain or go in and, if she remained,
we left our shadow and walked up to Mangares steps
resignedly, She was waiting for as, her figure deíned by
the light from the half.opened door. Her Srother always
teased her before he obeyed and I stood by the railings
looking at her. Her dress swung as she moved her body
and the soft rope of her hair tossed from side to Side.
Every morning I lay on the floor in the front parlour
watching her doar. The blind was pulled down co within
an inch of the sash so that I could not Se seen. When she
came out on the doorstep rny heart leaped. I ran to the hall,
seized my books and followed her. I kept Ker brown fig.
ure always in my eye and, When we came near the point at
which our ways diverged, I quiekened my pace and passa
This happened mornLng after morning. I had nev•er
uuwnns
spoken to her, except for a few casual words, and yet her
name was like a summons to all my foolish blood.
Her image accompanied me even in places the most
hostile to romance. On Saturday evenings when my aunt
went marketing had to go to carry some of the parcels,
We walked through the flaring streets, jostled by drunken
men ara bargaining women, amid the curses of labourers,
the shrill litanies of shop-boys who stood on guard by the
barrels of pigs' cheeks, the nasal chanting of street-singers,
who sang a come-all-you about O'Donovan Rossa, or a
ballad about the troubles in our native land, These noises
converged in a single sensation of life for me: I imagined
that I bore my chalice safely through a throng of foes. Her
name sprang to my lips at moments in strange prayers and
praises which I myself did not urderstand. My eyes were
often full of tears (I could not tell why) and at times a ilood
from my heart seemed to pour itself out into my basam.
thought little of the future, did not know whether I
would ever speak to her or oot or, if spoke to her, how I
eould teu her of rny confused adoration. But my body was
like a harp and het words and gestures like fingets
running upon the wires.
One evening I Went into the back drawing-room in
which the priest had died It was a dark rainy evening and
there was no sound in the house. Through one of the bro-
ken panes I heard the rain impinge upan the earth, the
fine incessant needles of water playing in the sc&n beds.
Some distant lamp or lighted window gleamed below me.
I was thankful that I could see go little. All my senseS
geemed to desire to v•eil themselves and, feeling that I was
about to slip fram them, I pressa the palms of m}' hands
together unta they trembled, murmuring: "O lovel O
many times,
